[Music]
crested black macaques
like to live in extraordinarily large
groups
sometimes numbering over a hundred
but what sets them apart is their
character
something that's intimately connected to
their home
[Music]
crested black macaques live only in
northern sulawesi
in rich forests that sit directly in the
path
of the monsoon
torrential rains batter the forest for
months on end
but it's thanks to these monsoon rains
that this baby will develop behaviors
which more than other monkeys we might
recognize in ourselves
but first the youngsters have a lot to
learn
starting with the monkey basics
like perfecting their climbing
techniques
but most important for the crested black
macaque is to learn
their code of etiquette
lip smacking is a request for a hug
showing a desire to be friends
blowing kisses and sharing cuddles is
not only reserved for close family
anyone in the troop can join in they are
amongst the most affectionate monkeys
on the planet
one reason is that with the coming of
each monsoon
the forest presents a banquet
over a hundred varieties of fruit
there is more than enough to go round
so much that they don't need to fight
over it
instead they put their energy into the
good things in life
friendships and exploring their forest
home
a discovery draws them all close
[Music]
a tiny casualty on the forest floor
sometimes their sensitive behavior can
seem
touchingly human
[Music]
the monkey's character is a result of
the riches that the monsoon brings
life with abundant food
groups of mothers and their young
gather together to form troops of up to
800 monkeys
janada's hands are usually busy plucking
grass
instead of grooming so to keep in touch
geladas have become
the chattiest of all monkeys
the gossipy banter can sound to
scientists like
sentences with words or even names for
each other
most agree it's often used to diffuse
tension
[Music]
and in geladas there's a lot to be tense
about
there are gangs of young males trying to
steal away the women from the family
harems
[Music]
each handful of females is guarded by a
single male
the harem master
the spare boys try and tempt the girls
away
hoping the resident father figure
doesn't notice
the males flash teeth at each other they
may fight
but it's usually just showing off in
case the girls are watching
[Music]
there's a lot of flirting on both sides
and then if an innocent looking female
is tempted to wander off past her
guardian
he has to decide what to do
girls mostly sneak off secretly for
affairs
this is a blatant challenge to his
authority
the illicit couple just sit the suitor
seems to be using his hand
to hide his grimace he probably doesn't
want trouble
chimps baboons and macaques may also try
to look innocent
when they break the rules
this is a complicated social problem
using your brain to control societies
is called machiavellian intelligence
after a 16th century courtyard who wrote
on manipulating political power
instead of launching into an attack the
politician here tries to grab a baby
monkey etiquette dictates nobody attacks
anyone holding a baby
so they're like living flat jackets
the mothers are worried and quickly
scoop up the youngest
here the two males face each other
the family man backs towards one of his
more loyal wives
calling for support
one of the youngsters suddenly switches
from mother
to father this should calm things down
with the youngster attached the father's
protected and the harem should unite
but it can go wrong
the youngster is slipping off the family
are frantic
the harem master has no protection from
[Applause]
attack
the bachelor is finally driven off with
a little help
from the mothers
[Applause]
but the fathers are meant to guard the
precious young he knows he's in all
sorts of trouble
if the infant dies the mothers may not
support him again
[Music]
our brain too wrestles with our own
similar problems
we are as social and as competitive
okay oh good boy hey my darling
horace was rescued about five months ago
just like harriet
it's thought his mum was hit by a car
he was just found sitting by her body he
was not even two weeks old
he was very traumatized very dehydrated
and he's made a really good recovery and
he has
created this amazing life for himself at
twala but as much as
it's lovely for horus to have a serval
and a daika and a dog
and domestic kittens as friends it would
be really
good for him to actually start learning
about being a monkey
and this could be his big chance another
orphan has just arrived at the center
this is jackie she is
also an orphan vervet um a little bit
younger than horace
she's probably three and a half months
old now what a clever girl
hey
[Music]
jackie lost her mum too and is still
very traumatized
she's gonna need lots of love and
reassurance
but if she can form a relationship with
horace that would also be great for her
because obviously the most comforting
thing for her would be to be
with another monkey
it's an important meeting good boy
if they get on horus will help jackie
become more confident
i am right here jackie so you don't need
to freak
okay we can just do our own thing
okay what do you think
and jackie will teach horace what it's
like to play
climb and learn with his own kind
hello horror special boy you mustn't be
jealous
gently jackie be nice come on let's be
friends
there we go oh good girl
oh good girl well done horace nice and
you're being such a gentleman
i'm very proud of you they are getting
on
so well you know monkeys are into
everything and now
that we have twofold monkeys
[Music]
there's going to be no peace horus and
jackie
can now grow up together here at twala
and sarah hopes that when they're older
they will join the center's monkey
troupe
i do my best to teach them what what i
can but there is no better way for them
to learn than from each other
so many females gather together on this
cliff
inevitably attract the attention of a
rival adult male
his aim is to defeat scarface and take
over his females
he leads a group of outcast bachelors
into battle
scarface spots them he has everything to
lose because
if the bachelors defeat him they won't
just take his females
they will kill his babies
the bachelors tried to reach the high
ground to launch their attack
scarface warns them to keep their
distance but the bachelors continue
their advance
uh
scarface grinds his teeth to show him
his business
but the bachelor leader reaches the
cliff top
and grinds his teeth in response
if scarface loses this battle he will
lose his legacy
[Music]
time to strike
he targets the bachelor leader
[Music]
okay
scarface has won
[Music]
and he returns to a hero's welcome
for our spy creatures being immersed in
the world of animals
is not without its hazards
in rajasthan the temple langers have
taken spy monkey into the heart of the
family
but some are keen to take the budding
relationship to the next level
and are getting a little too familiar
one seems to want to babysit her
but disaster strikes
an injured baby is a cause for concern
and this langer seems to believe she's
died
then something extraordinary happened
the monkeys gather round the motionless
spy creature
as if it is a real baby
[Music]
they react just as they do when their
own babies die
[Music]
a calm and contemplative mood descends
on the colony
there's a sense of grief as well as
empathy for one another
quite accidentally our spy creature is
at the center of something
extraordinary capturing emotions
that have rarely been observed
[Music]
such apparent expressions of grief may
not be unique to primates